README.md, before:

# Langton's Ant Simulation

A Python implementation of Langton's Ant cellular automaton with visualization, dataset generation, and highway detection capabilities.

## Features

- **Core Simulation**: Fast, accurate Langton's Ant simulation with expandable grid
- **Highway Detection**: Automatically detects the repeating highway pattern and its direction
- **Visualization**: Interactive pygame-based visualization with real-time controls
- **Dataset Generation**: Tools to generate large datasets for machine learning
- **Comprehensive Tests**: Full unit test coverage with pytest

## Installation

```bash
# Clone or navigate to the repository
cd langton_ant_claude_code

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Quick Start

### Visualize a Standard Simulation

```bash
python visualize.py
```

**Controls:**
- `SPACE`: Pause/Unpause
- `UP/DOWN`: Increase/Decrease speed
- `+/-`: Zoom in/out
- `Q` or `ESC`: Quit

### Generate a Dataset

```bash
# Generate 100 simulations
python generate_dataset.py --count 100 --output dataset/

# Generate with custom parameters
python generate_dataset.py --count 1000 --grid-size 150 --max-steps 150000
```

### Visualize from Dataset

```bash
# Replay a specific simulation from the dataset
python visualize.py --dataset dataset/sim_000042.json
```

## Usage Examples

### Custom Visualization

```bash
# Start at specific position
python visualize.py --start-x 30 --start-y 40 --direction 2

# Larger grid with faster simulation
python visualize.py --grid-size 200 --speed 50

# Custom window size
python visualize.py --window-size 1200 1200
```

### Dataset Generation Options

```bash
# Generate with empty grids only (no initial patterns)
python generate_dataset.py --count 50 --no-patterns

# Generate with custom pattern density
python generate_dataset.py --count 200 --pattern-density 0.15

# Generate with custom filename prefix
python generate_dataset.py --count 100 --output my_data/ --prefix experiment
```

## Project Structure

```
langton_ant_claude_code/
├── langton_ant/              # Main package
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── simulation.py         # Core simulation engine
│   ├── highway_detector.py   # Highway pattern detection
│   ├── visualizer.py         # Pygame visualization
│   └── dataset.py            # Dataset generation utilities
├── tests/                    # Unit tests
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── test_simulation.py
│   ├── test_highway_detector.py
│   └── test_dataset.py
├── visualize.py              # Visualization script
├── generate_dataset.py       # Dataset generation script
├── requirements.txt          # Python dependencies
├── PROJECT_SPECIFICATION.md  # Detailed project specification
└── README.md                 # This file
```

## Running Tests

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest tests/

# Run with coverage report
pytest --cov=langton_ant --cov-report=html tests/

# Run specific test file
pytest tests/test_simulation.py

# Run with verbose output
pytest -v tests/
```

## How It Works

### Langton's Ant Rules

1. Start with a grid of white (0) and black (1) cells
2. Place ant at starting position facing a direction
3. At each step:
   - If on white cell: turn right, flip to black, move forward
   - If on black cell: turn left, flip to white, move forward

### Highway Detection

After approximately 10,000 steps of chaotic behavior, Langton's Ant typically enters a repeating 104-step pattern called a "highway" that extends diagonally. The highway detector:

1. Tracks the ant's position and direction history
2. Looks for repeating 104-step patterns
3. Classifies the highway direction (NE, NW, SE, SW)

### Grid Expansion

The grid automatically expands when the ant approaches the boundaries, allowing unlimited exploration without pre-allocating large grids.

## API Usage

### Programmatic Simulation

```python
from langton_ant import LangtonAnt

# Create simulation
ant = LangtonAnt(
    initial_size=100,
    start_position=(50, 50),
    start_direction=0  # North
)

# Run single steps
for _ in range(1000):
    ant.step()

# Or run until highway detected
highway_direction = ant.run_until_highway(max_steps=100000)
print(f"Highway direction: {highway_direction}")
```

### Dataset Generation

```python
from pathlib import Path
from langton_ant.dataset import DatasetGenerator

# Create generator
generator = DatasetGenerator(Path("my_dataset"))

# Generate random configuration
config = generator.generate_random_config(grid_size=100)

# Run simulation
result = generator.run_simulation(config, max_steps=100000)

# Generate multiple simulations
results = generator.generate_dataset(
    num_simulations=100,
    grid_size=100
)
```

### Custom Visualization

```python
from langton_ant import LangtonAnt
from langton_ant.visualizer import Visualizer

# Create ant
ant = LangtonAnt(initial_size=100)

# Create visualizer
viz = Visualizer(
    ant=ant,
    window_size=(800, 800),
    steps_per_frame=10
)

# Run visualization
viz.run()
```

## Dataset Format

Simulation results are saved as JSON with optional NumPy arrays for grid data:

```json
{
  "configuration": {
    "start_position": [50, 50],
    "start_direction": 0,
    "grid_size": 100,
    "has_initial_grid": true
  },
  "highway_direction": "NE",
  "steps_to_highway": 10843,
  "grid_expansions": 2,
  "final_grid_size": [200, 200],
  "timestamp": "2024-01-15T10:30:00"
}
```

Initial grid patterns (if present) are saved as separate `.grid.npy` files.

## Performance

- **Simulation Speed**: ~100,000 steps/second (headless mode)
- **Highway Detection**: Typically 10,000-12,000 steps for standard configuration
- **Memory**: ~10-50 MB per simulation (varies with grid expansions)
- **Dataset Generation**: ~100 simulations/minute (with highway detection)

## Contributing

This project uses:
- **Code Style**: PEP 8
- **Testing**: pytest with >90% coverage target
- **Documentation**: Google-style docstrings

## License

See project documentation for license information.

## References

- [Langton's Ant on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Langton%27s_ant)
- Original paper: Langton, C. G. (1986). "Studying artificial life with cellular automata"

## Machine Learning Integration

The dataset generated by this project is designed for training ML models to predict highway direction from initial conditions. Each simulation provides:

- Initial grid configuration
- Starting position and direction
- Resulting highway direction

Load the dataset and extract features for your ML pipeline:

```python
from langton_ant.dataset import DatasetGenerator
from pathlib import Path

# Load dataset
generator = DatasetGenerator(Path("dataset"))
results = generator.load_dataset()

# Extract features and labels
for result in results:
    # Initial configuration
    start_pos = result.config.start_position
    start_dir = result.config.start_direction
    initial_grid = result.config.initial_grid

    # Label
    highway_direction = result.highway_direction  # 'NE', 'NW', 'SE', 'SW'

    # Use these for your ML model...
```

Commit message:

Precision about the source of the code.

README.md, after:

# Langton's Ant Simulation

A Python implementation of Langton's Ant cellular automaton with visualization, dataset generation, and highway detection capabilities. It has been written entirely by Claude code.

## Features

- **Core Simulation**: Fast, accurate Langton's Ant simulation with expandable grid
- **Highway Detection**: Automatically detects the repeating highway pattern and its direction
- **Visualization**: Interactive pygame-based visualization with real-time controls
- **Dataset Generation**: Tools to generate large datasets for machine learning
- **Comprehensive Tests**: Full unit test coverage with pytest

## Installation

```bash
# Clone or navigate to the repository
cd langton_ant_claude_code

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Quick Start

### Visualize a Standard Simulation

```bash
python visualize.py
```

**Controls:**
- `SPACE`: Pause/Unpause
- `UP/DOWN`: Increase/Decrease speed
- `+/-`: Zoom in/out
- `Q` or `ESC`: Quit

### Generate a Dataset

```bash
# Generate 100 simulations
python generate_dataset.py --count 100 --output dataset/

# Generate with custom parameters
python generate_dataset.py --count 1000 --grid-size 150 --max-steps 150000
```

### Visualize from Dataset

```bash
# Replay a specific simulation from the dataset
python visualize.py --dataset dataset/sim_000042.json
```

## Usage Examples

### Custom Visualization

```bash
# Start at specific position
python visualize.py --start-x 30 --start-y 40 --direction 2

# Larger grid with faster simulation
python visualize.py --grid-size 200 --speed 50

# Custom window size
python visualize.py --window-size 1200 1200
```

### Dataset Generation Options

```bash
# Generate with empty grids only (no initial patterns)
python generate_dataset.py --count 50 --no-patterns

# Generate with custom pattern density
python generate_dataset.py --count 200 --pattern-density 0.15

# Generate with custom filename prefix
python generate_dataset.py --count 100 --output my_data/ --prefix experiment
```

## Project Structure

```
langton_ant_claude_code/
├── langton_ant/              # Main package
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── simulation.py         # Core simulation engine
│   ├── highway_detector.py   # Highway pattern detection
│   ├── visualizer.py         # Pygame visualization
│   └── dataset.py            # Dataset generation utilities
├── tests/                    # Unit tests
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── test_simulation.py
│   ├── test_highway_detector.py
│   └── test_dataset.py
├── visualize.py              # Visualization script
├── generate_dataset.py       # Dataset generation script
├── requirements.txt          # Python dependencies
├── PROJECT_SPECIFICATION.md  # Detailed project specification
└── README.md                 # This file
```

## Running Tests

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest tests/

# Run with coverage report
pytest --cov=langton_ant --cov-report=html tests/

# Run specific test file
pytest tests/test_simulation.py

# Run with verbose output
pytest -v tests/
```

## How It Works

### Langton's Ant Rules

1. Start with a grid of white (0) and black (1) cells
2. Place ant at starting position facing a direction
3. At each step:
   - If on white cell: turn right, flip to black, move forward
   - If on black cell: turn left, flip to white, move forward

### Highway Detection

After approximately 10,000 steps of chaotic behavior, Langton's Ant typically enters a repeating 104-step pattern called a "highway" that extends diagonally. The highway detector:

1. Tracks the ant's position and direction history
2. Looks for repeating 104-step patterns
3. Classifies the highway direction (NE, NW, SE, SW)

### Grid Expansion

The grid automatically expands when the ant approaches the boundaries, allowing unlimited exploration without pre-allocating large grids.

## API Usage

### Programmatic Simulation

```python
from langton_ant import LangtonAnt

# Create simulation
ant = LangtonAnt(
    initial_size=100,
    start_position=(50, 50),
    start_direction=0  # North
)

# Run single steps
for _ in range(1000):
    ant.step()

# Or run until highway detected
highway_direction = ant.run_until_highway(max_steps=100000)
print(f"Highway direction: {highway_direction}")
```

### Dataset Generation

```python
from pathlib import Path
from langton_ant.dataset import DatasetGenerator

# Create generator
generator = DatasetGenerator(Path("my_dataset"))

# Generate random configuration
config = generator.generate_random_config(grid_size=100)

# Run simulation
result = generator.run_simulation(config, max_steps=100000)

# Generate multiple simulations
results = generator.generate_dataset(
    num_simulations=100,
    grid_size=100
)
```

### Custom Visualization

```python
from langton_ant import LangtonAnt
from langton_ant.visualizer import Visualizer

# Create ant
ant = LangtonAnt(initial_size=100)

# Create visualizer
viz = Visualizer(
    ant=ant,
    window_size=(800, 800),
    steps_per_frame=10
)

# Run visualization
viz.run()
```

## Dataset Format

Simulation results are saved as JSON with optional NumPy arrays for grid data:

```json
{
  "configuration": {
    "start_position": [50, 50],
    "start_direction": 0,
    "grid_size": 100,
    "has_initial_grid": true
  },
  "highway_direction": "NE",
  "steps_to_highway": 10843,
  "grid_expansions": 2,
  "final_grid_size": [200, 200],
  "timestamp": "2024-01-15T10:30:00"
}
```

Initial grid patterns (if present) are saved as separate `.grid.npy` files.

## Performance

- **Simulation Speed**: ~100,000 steps/second (headless mode)
- **Highway Detection**: Typically 10,000-12,000 steps for standard configuration
- **Memory**: ~10-50 MB per simulation (varies with grid expansions)
- **Dataset Generation**: ~100 simulations/minute (with highway detection)

## Contributing

This project uses:
- **Code Style**: PEP 8
- **Testing**: pytest with >90% coverage target
- **Documentation**: Google-style docstrings

## License

See project documentation for license information.

## References

- [Langton's Ant on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Langton%27s_ant)
- Original paper: Langton, C. G. (1986). "Studying artificial life with cellular automata"

## Machine Learning Integration

The dataset generated by this project is designed for training ML models to predict highway direction from initial conditions. Each simulation provides:

- Initial grid configuration
- Starting position and direction
- Resulting highway direction

Load the dataset and extract features for your ML pipeline:

```python
from langton_ant.dataset import DatasetGenerator
from pathlib import Path

# Load dataset
generator = DatasetGenerator(Path("dataset"))
results = generator.load_dataset()

# Extract features and labels
for result in results:
    # Initial configuration
    start_pos = result.config.start_position
    start_dir = result.config.start_direction
    initial_grid = result.config.initial_grid

    # Label
    highway_direction = result.highway_direction  # 'NE', 'NW', 'SE', 'SW'

    # Use these for your ML model...
```
